
               -------------------------------------------------
               I       So, you want to be a Sysop, huh?        I
               -------------------------------------------------
                                        
                    Written by Bo Zimmerman and Ken Thompson
                                        
          
          INTRODUCTION
          
          As  easy as it may seem, being a System Operator (SysOp), is
          a  tough,  thankless  job.    If  you are reading this, then
          you're in luck!
          
          What  you're  about  to  do (whether you know it or not), is
          turn  the  operation  of your computer system to the rest of
          the free world!  Though it sounds a bit ominous, let me tell
          you  that  the  information,  friendships,  partnerships and
          rewards from doing this are great!
          
          You  probably  have  thought  about  the cost of doing this;
          you've  just spent a large percentage on this; the software.
          It  has  been created with you in mind, but, please keep US,
          the  users,  in  mind  when you set your system up!  Getting
          many  people  calling  your system on a daily basis requires
          that  you  put alot of thought into what you're doing FIRST,
          before beginning any kind of set-up.
          
          
          TYPES OF BBS
          
          There  are  three major types of systems; the Zelch software
          is  capable  of  being  all  three.  First type is transfer-
          oriented.    Files,  files, and more files.  To tell you the
          truth,  not a very exciting system, and usually are the ones
          that get caught doing stuff they shouldn't be!  Second type,
          is  the  type the Zelch BBS was designed for, conversations.
          Usually  much  more popular than the transfer-based systems;
          these are the ones people complain about busy signals!!  The
          third  type  of system, is private, usually some combination
          of  the previous two types.  This is a system that you allow
          certain  people  on,  for  whatever  reasons  you have.  The
          flexability  of  the Zelch software gives you the capability
          of  keeping some sections public, others private.  Great for
          computer  users  groups,  to  keep the general public in one
          area, paid members in another.
          
          
          COSTS OF BBS OPERATIONS
          
          This  is  an  approximation of monthly operations of a small
          (two-drive)  BBS.    This  is  assuming  that  there  are no
          difficulties,  and  that  the system is operational 24 hours
          daily.
          
          Electricity consumption (based on $0.07/kWh):  approx. $6.50
          
          phone line (monthly fees):                    approx. $15.00
          
          
          In  addition,  there are the one-time fees, such as the cost
          of a BBS program, the cost of a dedicated phone line (highly
          reccomended!),  and  other  things that can be factored into
          the  cost  of  owning  a system.  With this in mind, you are
          looking at an average outlay, on a monthly basis, of $20-$25


          per  month.    Now, considering this is the cost of a decent
          dinner for two, this is not a bad outlay!
          
          Unfortunately,  this  does not include the cost of your time
          in  keeping  a system in operation.  For a full-time system,
          you  are  looking  at  30 minutes to an hour, depending upon
          your  involvement  with  your  system,  just  in the mundane
          things like validating (verifying) users, programs uploaded,
          messages left, and so forth.
          
          
          HOW TO MAKE IT SUCCESSFUL!
          
          Now, if you're STILL undaunted in becoming a SysOp, the only
          thing  I  can  say  is to try it on a part-time basis, using
          your  current  phone line.  I would reccomend something like
          9:00pm  to 7:00am for about two or three weeks, and note the
          number  of  calls you get.  Dependent upon your area, if you
          compare  notes  with  other established Commodore SysOp's in
          your  area,  and find that you are getting close to the same
          numbers  of  callers  they  do,  you're  well on your way to
          having a successful system.
          
          If there are other systems that you call on a regular basis,
          try to plan your system around things and topics that aren't
          available  on  other  systems.    The  idea  here  is  to be
          different, to have a reason for others to call YOUR system!
          
          Leaving  short, direct advertisements on other boards is the
          primary means of getting your system known to other BBS'ers.
          Long-winded,  and bragging ad's for systems will normally be
          passed  over for those that have just enough information for
          me  to  decide  that this is a BBS that I should call.  Most
          others  users AND sysop's I know feel the same way.  Be sure
          to  leave your BBS ad's in the proper place, and don't leave
          one every day; put one good one up and leave it!
          
          
          CONCLUSIONS
          
          This  should  give  you  enough  information  to  make  some
          informed  decisions  on the type of system you want your BBS
          to  be.    Feel  free  to contact any sysop in your area for
          additional  information;  most  would be glad to answer your
          questions on this aspect of our telecommunications hobby.
          



















